All right, I'm gonna go ahead and
demonstrate some of the LINQ features.
So I'm gonna say prop string Name, and
I am going to say prop int Salary, okay?
And we'll do FirstName and LastName, okay?
And then I'm gonna create a collection
of employees, var employees, so
I'm gonna say, new list.
We'll just go with the list of employee.
And I'm gonna go ahead and
fill this list with some new employees.
So I'm gonna say, FirstName = ''Spencer'',
LastName = "George", Salary = 100,000.
Kinda go with the example
that we had before.
We'll copy through these.
We'll make some more salaries,
some more different salaries, and 144444,
and we'll go, Albert,
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: And
Amy, and Grant, and Snape.
[LAUGH] All right, and Micah, all right.
So now we wanna operate
on this collection.
So, first things first, we're gonna look
at select, select is our way of kinda
taking a collection and transforming
it down into its component pieces.
So I'm gonna just start by collecting,
maybe I just want a distinct
list of last names in this list.
So these are the things you can do.
So you can go var distinctLastNames.
You can say, employees.Select.
You give it the e, this is where
that lambda function comes in.
E is the argument to that function,
and it will be of our employee object.
We do our equals sign, it's the equals and
greater than sign that
the pronounce goes into.
So we do Select(e) goes into e.LastName,
okay?
So now we've transformed this list
of employees, if we look here,
we now have a list of IEnumerable,
of string.
It says, T is string.
So I can see that by saying IEnumerable
<string> distinctLastNames, e of string.
So, we wanna say, well, what do we want?
We want the distinct
elements of this collection.
At this point,
if we spin through this,
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: We're
just gonna get, Console.WriteLine,
we're gonna get each of those names,
we haven't really done anything
to make them distinct yet.
We are gonna get, George,
George, George, Albert, George.
There's other methods on top of LINQ,
you can chain lots of LINQ calls together.
So what we would do is we can say Select,
and then we can call the extension method
called Distinct,
which does not take any argument.
It basically says, I'm just gonna return
to you the distinct elements of this thing
that you selected, such that at the end of
that, you will just get George and Albert.
And we can continue to chain
these things together.
We can say, Where(e =>), now,
where is a special case where, if you
look at the function signature, it takes
in a Func of employee and returns a bool.
So we'll say e, which is an employee
parameter, this is a little function,
goes into e.Salary, and
we wanna return a bool from this.
So we need to return
some kind of condition.
We could return true,
it doesn't really do us much good.
Or we could say,
e.Salary is greater than 50,000, right?
So what we're doing is using LINQ to very,
very easily express how we
want this collection to look.
Contrast that with the syntax
that we had shown previously
at the top of this example.
That's a crazy amount of work and
a crazy amount of code to get
exactly the same thing out.
So we can do that by using this,
by chaining together our LINQ methods.
So we've looked at Select, we've looked
at Where, we've looked at Distinct,
I wanna show you a little
bit of a property.
Think of it as a kinda
the origin of a record class.
Let's say that you just needed last
name and first name from this, and
you wanted to get
the distinct list of names.
Let's say there were two Snape Georges,
and
you just wanted to get
their distinct list.
So, there's a couple of
different ways you can do that.
The main way that you do that is declare
what's called an anonymous type.
So you can see that I am gonna go
ahead and change this back to var,
because it's going to be
interpreted as a string.LastName.
So what I've done is I've created
an entirely new type without actually
declaring a class or a record or a struct.
I've declared something completely new,
and I can use link to operate on that.
So we would say, e.FirstName, and
then we could still call distinct on this.
One of the cool properties of
anonymous types is like records,
they're structurally equal.
So anything where it's Snape George,
Snape George,
as long as those are the only properties I
selected, it's considered a unique record.
And we can see that,
if we run this, we can see that
we should print, we print three records.
So you could see that, yes, and
we've filtered out people that
have a salary less than 50,000.
So we've only gotten these.
And if we take this out and run it again,
you can see now that we get
four names instead of three.
So, those are some of
the features of LINQ.
So we've got Select, where we can
select an individual property.
We can select a bag of properties
using using anonymous type.
You can even select a whole new class.
You can instantiate a whole class in here,
if you wanted to.
You could create a person class and
instantiate that instead,
we can do that, class Person.
We'll go ahead and use the primary
constructor to save keystrokes.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: And we can
call that right here, new Person, and
then we would give it the string
FirstName, e.FirstName, e.Last name.
So that's an example of
some of the functions.
Let me talk to you about the ones
that I think are most important.
So, select, we've talked about that.
We've talked about Where,
e e.Salary is greater than 50,000.
So we've talked about Where,
used a filter.
You can also chain Wheres,
so you can say another wear.
You can say e is e.LastName.StartsWith
("S"), in this case, G.
So you chain this pretty well infinitely
down, as far down as you can go,
like I said, in a really nice and
expressive way.
You can also order by,
you can say, OrderBy.
And you can just say,
I just wanna order by the object itself,
which will work because of
the nature of anonymous types.
You could also say,
just order by last name.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Let me see,
yeah,
because I haven't defined property here,
create and assign property.
Create and assign property.
Just let my IDE do all the hard work.
So, that in a nutshell is LINQ.
Those are probably the most
important methods, but
there's a few more I do wanna touch on.
So up to this point we've
kind of operated on just
operating on just other collections, but
what if you wanna select
individual values from this list?
There's a couple of different
methods that you can use to do that.
So if I wanted to select Micah,
assuming he was there,
if I knew the position that his record
was gonna be inside of this, and
I often don't, I would use ElementAt or
ElementAtOrDefault.
And you can think of this like index or
syntax inside of an array or a list.
But you can basically say,
I just want to get the element
that exists in this collection.
A collection is gonna be up to,
in this case, probably 3, 4, 5 records.
Most of the time, you're probably
not gonna know ahead of time,
because you're just operating
on a collection with which you
don't necessarily know where
that thing is going to be.
But what you can do is there's four
methods that you need to know.
We've kinda gone through the projection.
We've talked about Select,
we've talked about Where, OrderBy, but
the four methods that you really need to
know are First or FirstOrDefault, and
Single or SingleOrDefault.
So First, essentially, we'll say,
give me the first number in this list.
So given this list of values,
I want you to give me the first one, and
it's going to return the top
element of that collection.
An empty array, which we've declared, or
an empty list here that we call first
on is going to throw an exception.
Because it says, hey,
I expect you to return something to me.
I don't care how many
elements are in the list, but
if you don't return anything to me,
a call to First will throw an exception.
FirstOrDefault, correspondingly,
will return the first element of an array,
or it It will return
the default value if there is no
elements in the array to return.
So in this case, it will return the
default value of an integer, which is 0.
If you had a list of reference types,
it would return a null.
Say that to Single,
which is not going to return the first,
it's going to expect there to be
exactly one element in this array.
That's what it expects in this collection.
So, given a single number list,
if we call .Single, it's gonna return 42
very happily, whereas in an empty list,
it will return an exception.
Or in a list, in a collection
with more than one element,
it's also going to throw an exception.
A method called a Single says I
want exactly one record, period.
And SingleOrDefault is either looking for
a collection that has one element or zero.
Anything else, it will throw an exception.
So, more than one element will
throw an exception every time.
They can also take an optional predicate.
So, let's say for instance,
that we just wanted
the single value of e.LastName ==,
let's see.
Or we'll say FirstName,
cuz we're looking at Micah.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach:
Console.WriteLine(micah), boom.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: And,
open up our terminal, and dotnet run.
And we'll see what happens.
Okay, so because inside of this collection
we filtered out Micah, who has a salary of
less than 50,000, we filtered them out,
so Single returned nothing.
Sorry, it didn't return nothing,
it threw an exception.
It said, I didn't find any element.
Correspondingly, as I mentioned before,
SingleOrDefault will return a null value.
Which is, yep, it printed it right here,
prints as an empty string.
So you can do that one of two ways.
So, this is an optional argument,
you can call SingleOrDefault.
And then, if you're calling
SingleOrDefault without a predicate,
you better be sure that this
thing has exactly zero or
one elements in this collection,
or it's gonna throw.
The most of the time when I'm
calling single or SingleOrDefault,
I'm passing in a predicate.
And as I mentioned, if I'm sure that that
collection has no other elements in it,
I'm gonna be calling SingleOrDefault
without the predicate.
This comes down to a word of warning, bugs
often hide in First or FirstOrDefault.
I see this countless times,
where a developer says, hey, I just
want the first element in this array.
This literally happened to
me a couple of weeks ago.
I had a developer under me who,
he fixed a bug by calling First.
He said, well, we just need
the first element in this array.
Not realizing that there were duplicates,
and
what he was doing was technically invalid.
It did get the program to run,
but then correspondingly,
set the system in an invalid state.
Because it said, well, you just wanted the
first record, but if you were expecting
a single record and there were multiple
ones, that can cause problems.
So I'm here to come to you with a word
of warning, that I do not use First or
FirstOrDefault almost ever,
if I can use Single or SingleOrDefault.
And because they're methods
on the same collection,
you can see that Single or
SingleOrDefault are perfectly valid.
And most of the time, when you're looking
at a collection and you're trying to get
a single value out, those are gonna be
the methods that you wanna reach for.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Questions.
>> Student 1: So, are these kind
of meant to be used once you've
already filtered through
a list to find what you want?
Because others, I guess I don't
really understand the point
of saying Single,
you have one element, yes.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Yeah,
that's a good question.
So let's take this example, real quick.
Kinda just look at this, let's say
that we didn't use this filtered list.
Let's say we were actually doing
an operation that was just on the list of
employees.
We can go back and
have our call to Single be on this.
So it could be,
it just depends on the use case, right?
It could be that you're filtering
down a list and then calling Single.
Most of the time you're probably
going to know ahead of time if there
is a single element in a list or not.
But in this case, you can absolutely
just call it pre-filtered.
And this would be your kind of,
filtering predicate.
And that's very common to do, especially
when you go into a database and you say,
I want employee record 1234.
There's probably,
in a well-designed system,
there's only gonna be one employee
record with an ID of 1234.
So most of the time you're usually
calling SingleOrDefault or
Single on non-filtered collections.
Good question.
>> Student 2: Is there a method
similar to Reduce, from JavaScript?
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Yes,
that is called Aggregate, and yes,
you can reduce it.
And essentially, it takes a collection and
reduces it down to a single value.
So if you could have a list of strings,
you could call Aggregate, and
then get it down to concatenating all
those strings together, for instance.
Let's see a quick example of that.
I'm gonna keep that up there.
But if you had a, we have
a collection here, we'll just use it.
We'll just say, var names, and we say,
employees.Select, e goes into e.FirstName.
We'll just get the first
name here to array.
And then you can aggregate,
names.Aggregate.
And so, you can see that if you hover
over it, it does return a string.
It takes in a func that takes in two
strings and then returns a string.
And what you can do is use that as a way
to combine all those strings together,
for instance.
And it's a good way to
sum a bunch of numbers.
Although there's a sum method that
you can just call to sum numbers.
So, you don't have to do that, per se.
But let's say x, y, because we
know we're taking a func of func
goes into x + y, and
then we'll see what it writes.
Console.WriteLine.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: You can think of
Aggregate as a way to just take a set of
values and convert it down to one value.
Often used for, as you can imagine,
aggregate functions.
So you can see that,
because all we've done is concatenate,
taken all their names and
then concatenated them together,
that we've aggregated them down
to a single string value here.
And that value is all of the names put
together, Spencer, Snape, Micah, Grant,
and Snape.
There's a couple of other LINQ methods
that you'll definitely wanna know about.
So if we go down to here,
Aggregate Methods.
If you have a collection of numbers and
you wanna sum them together,
you can take for instance,
this list, and then call .sum.
And then say, it will sum all of those
integer or doubles or decimals for you.
There is a max and a min,
that we can use to return the maximum
value within an array, or a collection,
I mean, or the minimum value,
which, in this case, would be 1.
And of course, there's an average,
which would return the mean.
And there is something that you
should know about that sum and
those aggregate methods,
is that if you call them on empty lists,
you will get an invalid
operation exception.
Because you can't sum a collection
of numbers that does not exist.
So if this is an empty array and you call
sum on it, it will throw an exception.
You can use the DefaultIfEmpty to
actually populate it to say, hey,
if this array is empty, then just
give me value 0, just default to 0.
And that will protect you
from getting an exception,
throw it if you just wanted to
sum the values in array and
you don't know ahead of time if there
will actually be values in that array.
Maybe you're getting
salaries from a database and
you just wanna sum them all together, but
you've added filtering criteria, you
only want salaries greater than 300,000.
Well, nobody in the company makes that.
So that would be a use case for
why we would use that.